[13791] Adding content filter documentation (#361)
eProsima/Fast-DDS-docs: docs/fastdds/dds_layer/topic/contentFilteredTopic/customFilters.rst

.. include:: ../../../../03-exports/aliases.include
.. include:: ../../../../03-exports/aliases-api.include

.. _dds_layer_topic_contentFilteredTopic_custom_filters:

Using custom filters
====================

Fast DDS API supports the creation and later registration of user's custom filters to be used in the creation of a
|ContentFilteredTopic-api|.
Required steps for using a Custom Filter are:

- :ref:`dds_layer_topic_customfilter_creation`
- :ref:`dds_layer_topic_customfilter_factory`
- :ref:`dds_layer_topic_customfilter_register`
- :ref:`dds_layer_topic_customfilter_create_topic`

.. _dds_layer_topic_customfilter_creation:

Creating the Custom Filter
--------------------------

A custom filter must be implemented by a class which inherates from |IContentFilter-api|.

> There is only one function must be implemented, overriding |IContentFilter::evaluate-api|.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only one function must be implemented, overriding |IContentFilter::evaluate-api|.
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

Each time a sample is received by a |DataReader-api|, this function is called with next arguments.

- ``payload`` - The serialized payload of the sample which the custom filter has to evaluate.
- ``sample_info`` - The extra information which accompanies the sample.
- ``reader_guid`` - The GUID of the reader for which the filter is being evaluated.

> The function returns a boolean where ``true`` implies the samples is accepted and ``false`` rejects the sample.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function returns a boolean where ``true`` implies the sample is accepted and ``false`` rejects the sample.
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

Next snippet code shows an example of Custom Filter which deserialize the ``index`` field from a serialized sample and
rejects samples where ``index`` > ``low_mark_`` and ``index`` < ``high_mark_``.

.. literalinclude:: /../code/DDSCodeTester.cpp
   :language: c++
   :start-after: //DDS_CUSTOM_FILTER_CLASS
   :end-before: //!
   :dedent: 4

.. _dds_layer_topic_customfilter_factory:

Creating the Factory for the Custom Filter
------------------------------------------

Fast DDS creates filters through a factory.
Therefore a factory which provides instantiation of a Custom Filter must be implememented.

> A Custom Filter's factory has to inherites from |IContentFilterFactory-api|.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Custom Filter's factory has to inherit from |IContentFilterFactory-api|.
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

> This interface requires two function to be implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This interface requires two functions to be implemented.
```

> This interface contains only two function to be implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This interface requires two function to be implemented.
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

Each time a Custom Filter has to be created or updated, |DomainParticipant-api| calls

> |IContentFilterFactory::create_content_filter-api| with next arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|IContentFilterFactory::create_content_filter-api| with these arguments:
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

> Each time a Custom Filter has to be created or updated, |DomainParticipant-api| calls
> |IContentFilterFactory::create_content_filter-api| with next arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each time a Custom Filter has to be created or updated, |DomainParticipant::create_contentfilteredtopic-api| calls internally
|IContentFilterFactory::create_content_filter-api| with next arguments.
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

- ``filter_class_name`` - Filter class name for which the factory is being called.

>   Allows using the same factory for different filter classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It allows using the same factory for different filter classes.
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

- ``type_name`` - Type name of the topic being filtered.
- ``data_type`` - Type support object of the topic being filtered.
- ``filter_expression`` - Custom filter expression.
- ``filter_parameters`` - Values to set for the filter parameters (where custom filter expression has its pattern to

>   sustitutes them).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  substitute them).
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

> - ``filter_instance`` - When a filter is being created, it will be nullptr on input, and will have the pointer to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``filter_instance`` - When a filter is being created, it will be ``nullptr`` on input, and will have the pointer to the
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

  created filter instance on output.
  When a filter is being updated, it will have a previously returned pointer on input.

> This function should return the results of the operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function should return the result of the operation.
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

> 

Reviewer: Remove extra blank line

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

> When a Custom Filter should be removed, |DomainParticipant-api| calls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a Custom Filter should be removed, |DomainParticipant::delete_contentfilteredtopic-api| calls internally
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

|IContentFilterFactory::delete_content_filter-api|.
The factory must remove the provided Custom Filter's instance.

Next snippet code shows an example of Custom Filter's factory which manages instances of the Custom Filter implemented

> in previous section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the previous section.
```

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

- ``filter_expression`` - Custom filter expression.
- ``filter_parameters`` - Values to set for the filter parameters (where custom filter expression has its pattern to
  sustitutes them).
- ``filter_instance`` - When a filter is being created, it will be nullptr on input, and will have the pointer to the
  created filter instance on output.
  When a filter is being updated, it will have a previously returned pointer on input.

This function should return the results of the operation.

When a Custom Filter should be removed, |DomainParticipant-api| calls
|IContentFilterFactory::delete_content_filter-api|.
The factory must remove the provided Custom Filter's instance.

Next snippet code shows an example of Custom Filter's factory which manages instances of the Custom Filter implemented
in previous section.

.. literalinclude:: /../code/DDSCodeTester.cpp
   :language: c++
   :start-after: //DDS_CUSTOM_FILTER_FACTORY_CLASS
   :end-before: //!
   :dedent: 4

.. _dds_layer_topic_customfilter_register:

Registering the Factory
-----------------------

To be able to use the Custom Filter in an application, the Custom Filter's factory must be registered in the

> |DomainParticipant-api|. Next snippet code shows how to register a factory through API funciton

Reviewer: Break line after ending the sentence.

Reviewer 2: done in e50457f3c6f29b

|DomainParticipant::register_content_filter_factory-api|.

.. literalinclude:: /../code/DDSCodeTester.cpp
   :language: c++
   :start-after: //DDS_CUSTOM_FILTER_REGISTER_FACTORY
   :end-before: //!
   :dedent: 8

.. _dds_layer_topic_customfilter_create_topic:

Creating a ContentFilteredTopic using the Custom Filter
-------------------------------------------------------

:ref:`dds_layer_topic_contentFilteredTopic_creation` explains how to create a |ContentFilteredTopic-api|.
In the case of using a Custom Filter, |DomainParticipant::create_contentfilteredtopic-api| has an overload adding an
argument to select the Custom Filter.

Next snippet code shows how to create a |ContentFilteredTopic-api| using the Custom Filter.

.. literalinclude:: /../code/DDSCodeTester.cpp
   :language: c++
   :start-after: //DDS_CUSTOM_FILTER_CREATE_TOPIC
   :end-before: //!

>    :dedent: 8

Reviewer: I suggest adding a note explaining that `DomainParticipant::delete_contentfilteredtopic` API is enough to delete Custom filter ContentFilteredTopic.

Reviewer 2: This is already explained in the section about `ContentFilterTopic`.

Reviewer: I do not completely agree. Section 3.5.8.1 explains how to create a ContentFilteredTopic and it is the section you are referring. However, how to delete a ContentFilteredTopic is explained in section 3.5.8.3. I do not mind adding another reference to this section, saying that to delete a custom ContentFilteredTopic please refer to this other section.

   :start-after: //DDS_CUSTOM_FILTER_CREATE_TOPIC
   :end-before: //!
   :dedent: 8

.. important::
   Even though this specific custom filtering example is not using the filter expression, mind that the expression

>    cannot be an empty string because that means that no filtering is being done as explained in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   cannot be an empty string as that disables filtering as explained in
```
